First proposal to "remove" single packet number space option (#149)
quicwg/multipath: draft-ietf-quic-multipath.md

  * Congestion Control must be per-path (following {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}})
which usually also requires per-path RTT measurements
  * PMTU discovery should be performed per-path
  * The use of this multipath extension requires the use of non-zero
Connection IDs in both directions.
  * A path is determined by the 4-tuple of source and destination IP
address as well as source and destination port. Therefore, there can be
at most one active paths/connection ID per 4-tuple.
  * If the 4-tuple changes without the use of a new connection ID (e.g.

> due to a NAT rebinding), this is considered as a migration events and not
> an new path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
due to a NAT rebinding), this is considered as a migration event and not
as a new path.
```

- Path Identifier (Path ID): An identifier that is used to identify
  a path in a QUIC connection at an endpoint. Path Identifier is used
  in multipath control frames (etc. PATH_ABANDON frame) to identify
  a path. The Path ID is defined as the sequence number of
  the destination Connection ID used for sending packets on that

>   particular path. 

Author: ```suggestion
  particular path.
```

frames to identify a path, and the Packet Number Space Identifier is
used in 1-RTT packets and ACK_MP frames to distinguish packet number
spaces for different paths. Both identifiers have the same value, which

> is the sequence number of the connection ID, when a new path is established.

Reviewer: Maybe it can be addressed later, but given that the Path Identifier and the PNS ID are now always the same, we may simplify this section and only introduce one concept (i.e., the Path Identifier).

Author: Yes, I was planning to raise a separate issue and PR after this one is merged. I think that would be cleaner.

{{QUIC-TRANSPORT}} with single active path and MUST NOT use any frame or

> mechanism defined in this document.

Reviewer: Given that we drop support for single packet number space and zero-length CID, we need to change the value of `enable_multipath`. Running a random generator gave me `0x0f739bbc1b666db9`, but we can of course choose another value (for instance, `0x0f739bbc1b666dXX` where `XX` is the draft version; the next version 04 of this document could use  `0x0f739bbc1b666d04`). The IANA table should be updated as well.

Author: Yes, I agree that we need to change. Just need to decide with number.

Reviewer: Just committed 13e6610576 to address this.

If the parameter is set to 1, both endpoints MUST use non-zero connection
IDs. If an enable_multipath parameter set to 1 is received and the carrying packet

> does not contain a non-zero legnth connection, the receiver MUST treat this as a connection error of type

Author: ```suggestion
does not contain a non-zero length connection ID, the receiver MUST treat this as a connection error of type
```

in {{Section 5.1.1 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}, or also 0 if the Connection ID
is zero-length.

To open a new path, an endpoint SHALL use different Connection IDs on different paths.
Still, the receiver may observe the same Connection ID used on different
4-tuples due to, e.g., NAT rebinding. In such case, the receiver reacts
as specified in {{Section 9.3 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

If the initial path carries no Connection ID and a QUIC packet without
a Connection ID is received on a 5-tuple of a non validated path,
the receiver may try to decrypt the packet assuming the packet number
space of the initial path with Path ID 0. This usually is only plausible

> if only the source address or port are different or if a specific 

Author: ```suggestion
if only the source address or port are different or if a specific
```

alternative address was previously announced by the receiver.
If this packet does not contain a PATH_VALIDATION frame, it must be
treated as a path mirgation event as specified in {{Section 9 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.
Alternatively, the receiver MAY decide to simple drop the packet without
even attempting to decrypt.

Acknowledgements of Initial and Handshake packets MUST be carried using
ACK frames, as specified in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}. The ACK frames, as defined
in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}, do not carry path identifiers. If for any reason
ACK frames are received in 1-RTT packets while the state of multipath
negotiation is ambiguous, they MUST be interpreted as acknowledging
packets sent on path 0.

Further, if the initial path uses zero-length Connection ID and
packets without a Connection ID are successfully received over another validated path,

> these packet MUST either be acknowledged using ACK_MP frames with packet number space ID 0,

Author: ```suggestion
these packets MUST either be acknowledged using ACK_MP frames with packet number space ID 0,
```

or ACK frames, as specified in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

> However, even if packet without a Connection ID are successfully received

Author: ```suggestion
However, even if packets without a Connection ID are successfully received
```

on multiple paths, it is RECOMMENDED to only use one of the active paths
for sending of ack-elicting packets with zero-length Connection ID as this

> avoids large ACK frames and ambiguity if loss detection and RTT estimation

Author: ```suggestion
avoids large ACK frames and ambiguity in loss detection and RTT estimation
```

negotiation is ambiguous, they MUST be interpreted as acknowledging
packets sent on path 0.

> A new ACK frame format is used as specified in {{ack-mp-frame}} that
> MUST be used for for acknolowing 1-RTT packets.

Reviewer: The added text conflicts with the latter one saying "endpoints SHOULD use ACK_MP frames instead of ACK", and I don't think receiving ACK frames to acknowledge path 0 is actually an issue. Maybe this would be better?
```suggestion
The ACK_MP frame, as specified in {{ack-mp-frame}}, is used to
acknowledge 1-RTT packets.
```

based on the Destination Connection ID in each packet.

As soon as the negotiation of multipath support is completed,

> endpoints SHOULD use ACK_MP frames instead of ACK frames also for 0-RTT packets
> that are acknowledged after the handshake concluded using the Packet Number Space Identifier 0.

Reviewer: Maybe clearer?
```suggestion
endpoints SHOULD use ACK_MP frames instead of ACK frames to acknowledge application
data packets, including 0-RTT packets, received on path ID 0 after the handshake concluded.
```

using N paths, the limit is reached. If the client wants to start
a new path, it has to retire one of the established paths.

ACK_MP frame (defined in {{ack-mp-frame}}) SHOULD be send on the same path

> as identified by the Path Identifier. However, an ACK_MP frame can be returned via a

Reviewer: No strong opinion here, but should the "an ACK_MP frame can be returned" be instead "an ACK_MP frame MAY be returned"?

Author: No, the normative part is the active part ("SHOULD send"). This other sentence should not be normative because it's just explaining that this can happen and needs to be considered.

using N paths, the limit is reached. If the client wants to start
a new path, it has to retire one of the established paths.

> ACK_MP frame (defined in {{ack-mp-frame}}) SHOULD be send on the same path 

Author: ```suggestion
ACK_MP frame (defined in {{ack-mp-frame}}) SHOULD be send on the same path
```

> as identified by the Path Identifier. However, an endpoint can be returned via either a

Author: ```suggestion
as identified by the Path Identifier. However, an ACK_MPfFrame can be returned via either a
```

> as identified by the Path Identifier. However, an ACK_MP frame can be returned via either a
> different path, based on different strategies of sending ACK_MP frames.

Author: ```suggestion
as identified by the Path Identifier. However, an ACK_MP frame can be returned via a
different path, based on different strategies of sending ACK_MP frames.
```

calculated by combining the packet protection IV with the packet number
and with the path identifier.

The path ID for 1-RTT packets is the sequence number of the Connection ID

> as specfied in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.  {{Section 19 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as specified in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.  {{Section 19 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}
```

calculated by combining the packet protection IV with the packet number
and with the path identifier.

> The path ID for 1-RTT packets is the sequence number of the Connection ID 

Author: ```suggestion
The path ID for 1-RTT packets is the sequence number of the Connection ID
```

    the control frame.
    Note that this is the connection identifier used by the peer
    when sending packets on the to-be-closed path.

>     This method SHOULD be used by default.

Reviewer: We can of course delegate this on a subsequent PR, but I think we should get rid of the `Identifier Type` for the PATH_ABANDON and PATH_STATUS frames. Also, I wonder it the value 1 should rather be the default (given #137).

Author: Yes, I was also planning to raise a separate issue and PR on this one after the merge.

# Acknowledgments

TBD

--- back

> # Sending packet on multiple paths with zero length connection ID

Author: ```suggestion
# Sending packets on multiple paths with zero length connection ID
```

This section describes, if carefully considered, how packets can be send on
multiple paths even if a zero-length connection ID is used on all paths.
As there is no way for the receiver to distingliush different packet number
spaces before decryption based on the connection ID, using
zero-length CIDs also implies that the same packet number space is used on all paths.

When using the same packet number space
on multiple paths, out of order delivery is likely. This causes inflation of the number of
acknowledgement ranges and therefore of the
the size of ACK frames. Senders that accept to use a single number
space on multiple paths when sending to a node using zero-length CID need
to take special care to minimize the impact of multipath
delivery on loss detection, congestion control, and ECN handling.
This proposal specifies algorithms for
controlling the size of acknowledgement packets and ECN handling in

> Section {{using-zero-length}} and {{ecn-handling}}.

Author: ```suggestion
{{ecn-handling}}.
```

of ACK_MP frames to reduce overhead as the additional path ID field
will anyway always carry the same value.

If senders decide to send packets on paths with different
transmission delays, some packets will very likely be received out
of order. This will cause the ACK frames to carry multiple ranges of
received packets. The large number of range increases the size of
ACK frames, causing transmission and processing overhead.

The size and overhead of the ACK frames can
be controlled by the combination of one or several of the following:

*  Not transmitting again ACK ranges that were present in an ACK
   frame acknowledged by the peer.

*  Delay acknowledgements to allow for arrival of "hole filling"
   packets.

*  Limit the total number of ranges sent in an ACK frame.

*  Limiting the number of transmissions of a specific ACK range, on
   the assumption that a sufficient number of transmissions almost
   certainly ensures reception by the peer.

*  Send multiple messages for a given path in a single socket
   operation, so that a series of packets sent from a single path
   uses a series of consecutive sequence numbers without creating
   holes.

>  

Author: ```suggestion

```
